Requirements and Design for Testnet Faucets (#55)
AztecProtocol/engineering-designs: docs/faucets/dd.md

# Testnet Faucet Design Document

- Owner: @just-mitch
- Approvers:
  - @aminsammara
  - @rahul-kothari
  - @LHerskind
  - @PhilWindle
  - @signorecello
- [PRD](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/engineering-designs/blob/11ff0c45015027554f13d37f2df85e84090a55a4/docs/faucets/prd.md)
- Target DD Approval Date: 2025-03-20
- Target Project Delivery Date: 2025-03-28

## Executive Summary

Update the fee asset and staking asset to have "minter" roles.

Deploy new "handler" contracts that have the minter role on their respective assets.

The FeeAssetHandler will mint a fixed amount to any caller.

The StakingAssetHandler will add an address to the validator set, when called by the owner.

The discord bot should be augmented to allow someone to pass it a merkle proof of the archive tree, and only then be added to the validator set.

## Timeline

Outline the timeline for the project. E.g.

- Core contract dev : 1-2 days
  - build fee asset handler
  - build staking asset handler
  - tests
- discord bot dev : 1-2 days
- run upgrade : <0.5 days

Total: 3-5 days

## Introduction

> We are not concerned about the DOS risk of someone holding a large amount of fee asset and flooding the network with transactions: the node and p2p layer should be able to handle this; controlling the production of fee asset needs only to prevent infinite minting (and thus a DOS against the users of the network).

Reviewer: Just a comment to extend here.

We are not concerned, as it can already be done with a minimal amount. Depending on which part you want to dos, you can collect tiny portions of fees and just not spend them and then use them all at once, or you can just create a lot of transactions using the same fees, so seen individually they look fine but most will be reverting.

		mintAmount = _mintAmount;
	}

	function mint(address _recipient) external override {
		FEE_ASSET.mint(_recipient, mintAmount);
	}

	function setMintAmount(uint256 _amount) external override onlyOwner {
    mintAmount = _amount;
	}
}
```

We will manually deploy this contract. The owner will be the same as the current owner of the FeeAsset.

The handler's deployed address will need to be made known in discord and other public channels/docs.

#### Choosing the mint amount

As mentioned above, we only need to prevent infinite minting (i.e. over 2^256).

We can calculate the maximum mint amount based on the expected L1 block production rate, the expected L1 gas cost of a mint, and the amount of time we expect the handler to be live.

Assume the cost to mint is 5K gas.

Then if a block were completely full of `mint` transactions, the maximum number of mints would be 38M / 5K = 7600.

This means that we could be maximally minting 7600 / 12 = 633 times per second.

Suppose that we expect the handler to be live for a maximum of 5 years.

Then we have a maximum of 5 \* 365 \* 24 \* 60 \* 60 \* 633 ~= 1e11 mints.

Thus, the maximum mint amount is (2^256 - 1) / 1e11 ~= 1e66.

> But we'll err on the side of caution and use 1e42.

Reviewer: Disagree on numbers here. I don't think you would want to ever reach the limit. You don't want to have close to max if you can get away with it, it is just pain for if the token is used in any math. I think we should target a much smaller, that is still enough to cover most everyday things. 1e42 is minting 1e24 or a TRILLION TRILLIONS. I think we can be much more sane with just a 10K or something like that. We just need to evaluate what a few things would cost.

The thing is:
- argue that we can pick a sane number
- and that it will never overflow and cause pain in any meaningful reality

### Staking Asset

The staking asset will be deployed with the same owner as the fee asset. In addition, a `StakingAssetHandler` will be deployed, which will have the minter role on the staking asset.

### Staking Asset Handler

```solidity
interface IStakingAssetHandler {
	function addValidator(address _attester, address _proposer) external;
	function setRollup(address _rollup) external;
	function setDepositAmount(uint256 _amount) external;
	function setMinMintInterval(uint256 _interval) external;
}

contract StakingAssetHandler is IStakingAssetHandler, Ownable {
	IMintableERC20 public immutable STAKING_ASSET;

	uint256 public depositAmount;
	uint256 public lastMintTimestamp;
	uint256 public minMintInterval;
	IStakingCore public rollup;

	constructor(address _owner, address _stakingAsset, address _rollup, uint256 _depositAmount, uint256 _minMintInterval) Ownable(_owner) {
		STAKING_ASSET = IMintableERC20(_stakingAsset);
		depositAmount = _depositAmount;
		rollup = IStakingCore(_rollup);
		minMintInterval = _minMintInterval;
	}

	function addValidator(address _attester, address _proposer) external override onlyOwner {

> 		require(block.timestamp - lastMintTimestamp >= minMintInterval, "Min mint interval not met");

Reviewer: This one makes sense to me if you are trying to drip people in one at a time, but not if you just want to limit growth daily. I'm not fully getting which is your target here?

If daily, you would mint if out of funds, and "reset" that clock, so you don't need to mint every time. 

Also, this will fail the deposit because it have not approved the rollup to pull funds.

		lastMintTimestamp = block.timestamp;
		STAKING_ASSET.mint(address(this), depositAmount);
		rollup.deposit(_attester, _proposer, owner(), depositAmount);
	}

	function setRollup(address _rollup) external override onlyOwner {
		rollup = IStakingCore(_rollup);
	}

	function setDepositAmount(uint256 _amount) external override onlyOwner {
		depositAmount = _amount;
	}

	function setMinMintInterval(uint256 _interval) external override onlyOwner {
		minMintInterval = _interval;
	}

> 

Reviewer: I would add `setWithdrawer(address _withdrawer)` that can be called by the owner. And not have bot be the owner. Bot should not have admin rights and only minimal access.

}
```

> The owner of the handler will be a different EOA, since it will be held by the discord bot.

Reviewer: I would NOT give the owner of this to the bot. Have two roles, one that is owner and can change things, and one that is the bot and can do one thing only: `addValidator`.

#### Upgrades

The handler will need to be upgraded to the new rollup address when a new rollup is made canonical.

> This will be done by manually by the person on the Aztec Labs team managing the discord bot.

Reviewer: Should not be owned by bot.

### Discord Bot

The `/add-validator` command needs to be augmented to accept a block number and an archive merkle proof.

When this command is invoked, it should:

> 1. Ensure the user does not have a "validator" badge already

Reviewer 2: Can we instead specify maximum amount of mints any specific `validator` badge holder can make? Reasoning being is that some teams will want to run multiple validators i.e. 5/10

2. Query L1 for the specified block number

> 3. Ensure that the timestamp associated with the block is from within the last 5 minutes

Reviewer 2: Was lasse's comment around stalled block production addressed separately? i.e. in the case block production stopped for more than 5 mins, we cannot add any more new validators.

Author: No, you're right- I'll update it to work off the most recent proven block instead.

4. Verify the merkle proof
5. Mint staking assets for itself

> 6. Add the user's address to the validator set, specifying itself as the withdrawer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Add the user's address to the validator set, specifying the discord bot's key as the withdrawer
```

Reviewer: As noted earlier, I think it should use a contract specified value and not necessarily the owner. I think that makes more sense as I would not want to have admin rights in the hottest of wallets known to mankind.

> 7. Apply a new "validator" badge in discord to aid with sybil resistance (see below)

Reviewer 2: wrt comment from above about allowing multiple mints: if approved, this could be changed to "apply new validator badge if they don't have one already"

		rollup.deposit(_attester, _proposer, owner(), depositAmount);
	}

	function setRollup(address _rollup) external override onlyOwner {
		rollup = IStakingCore(_rollup);
	}

	function setDepositAmount(uint256 _amount) external override onlyOwner {
		depositAmount = _amount;
	}

	function setMinMintInterval(uint256 _interval) external override onlyOwner {
		minMintInterval = _interval;
	}

}
```

The owner of the handler will be a different EOA, since it will be held by the discord bot.

#### Upgrades

The handler will need to be upgraded to the new rollup address when a new rollup is made canonical.

This will be done by manually by the person on the Aztec Labs team managing the discord bot.

### Discord Bot

The `/add-validator` command needs to be augmented to accept a block number and an archive merkle proof.

When this command is invoked, it should:

1. Ensure the user has not added `X` validators already (using a mapping based on the user's discord ID)
2. Query L1 for the proven tip of the chain
3. Ensure that proven tip's block number matches the block number provided by the user
4. Verify the merkle proof
5. Mint staking assets for itself

> 6. Add the user's address to the validator set, specifying the discord bot's address as the withdrawer

Reviewer: As above, I don't think we should have the bot as owner and withdrawer and all. Don't want anything remotely close to admin rights in the hottest of all wallets if we don't need to.

Separately, we could have just allowed this to remain a purely manual process, and required logs/challenges to be sent back and forth between a potential validator and someone at Aztec Labs.

That sounds error prone and doesn't sound like a good use of anyone's time, especially when there could be tens to hundreds of validators going through this process.

### Sequencer Client

The sequencer must be updated in its block building logic to ensure that it does not exceed the mana limit for a block as specified on L1.

For now, it can simply query the rollup for `getManaLimit` before building each block; at mainnet, we will be able to move this call to startup, since the rollup will be immutable.

In addition, it must have a new environment variable "MAX_BLOCK_MANA"; when building a block it should stop at the minimum of the contract-specified mana target and the environment variable.

> ### P2P

Reviewer: Both this and the sequencer client seems fairly separate to the faucets.

# Testnet Faucet Design Document

- Owner: @just-mitch
- Approvers:
  - @aminsammara
  - @rahul-kothari
  - @LHerskind
  - @PhilWindle
  - @signorecello
- [PRD](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/engineering-designs/blob/11ff0c45015027554f13d37f2df85e84090a55a4/docs/faucets/prd.md)
- Target DD Approval Date: 2025-03-20
- Target Project Delivery Date: 2025-03-28

## Executive Summary

Update the fee asset and staking asset to have "minter" roles.

Deploy new "handler" contracts that have the minter role on their respective assets.

The FeeAssetHandler will mint a fixed amount to any caller.

The StakingAssetHandler will add an address to the validator set, when called by the owner.

The discord bot should be augmented to allow someone to pass it a merkle proof of the archive tree, and only then be added to the validator set.

## Timeline

Outline the timeline for the project. E.g.

- Core contract dev : 1-2 days
  - build fee asset handler
  - build staking asset handler
  - tests
- discord bot dev : 1-2 days
- run upgrade : <0.5 days

Total: 3-5 days

## Introduction

> We are not concerned about the DOS risk of someone holding a large amount of fee asset and flooding the network with transactions: the node and p2p layer should be able to handle this; controlling the production of fee asset needs only to prevent infinite minting (and thus a DOS against the users of the network).

Reviewer 3: Is this true though? That we aren't concerned with users minting lots of fee asset and then flooding the network? 

Assuming the node/p2p can cope with it. Doesn't it just do 1 of 2 things?

1. Build up a huge backlog of pointless txs from bots/farmers that hogs the network for a long time.
2. If we set the mempool limits low to avoid a build up, people have their txs evicted. Either way the user exp is terriblke.

This means that we could be maximally minting 7600 / 12 = 633 times per second.

Separately, the current amount of mana required for a public transfer is around 1e5 mana.

If we suppose that the base fee is 100 fee asset per mana, then a public transfer will cost 1e7 fee asset.

> Suppose that a contract deployment costs 100x as much as a public transfer, so 1e9 fee asset.

Reviewer: Don't we have numbers on this? 👀

Author: I can't find "official" numbers. We don't have Tempo hooked up to masternet, so I can't look at `processTx` traces to grab the gas used for individual transactions. I can see historically though that during network startup, there are transactions that cost ~500K mana. It seems to do a deployment of a schnorr account during this.

	function setRollup(address _rollup) external;
	function setDepositAmount(uint256 _amount) external;
	function setMinMintInterval(uint256 _interval) external;
	function setMaxDepositsPerMint(uint256 _maxDepositsPerMint) external;
	function setWithdrawer(address _withdrawer) external;
}

contract StakingAssetHandler is IStakingAssetHandler, Ownable {
	IMintableERC20 public immutable STAKING_ASSET;

	mapping(address => bool) public canAddValidator;

	uint256 public depositAmount;
	uint256 public lastMintTimestamp;
	uint256 public minMintInterval;
	uint256 public maxDepositsPerMint;
	IStakingCore public rollup;
	address public withdrawer;

> 	modifier onlyCanAddValidator() {

Reviewer: Not something that needs to be updated in this DD. But you can use the `AccessControl` library from open zeppelin do deal with things like this where the are specific roles.

Author: Since our use was so specific I thought to just keep it simpler. Happy to use it though.
